# Relational Model in DBMS

## Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Key Terms in the Relational Model](#key-terms-in-the-relational-model)
- [Codd Rules in Relational Model](#codd-rules-in-relational-model)
  - [Key Codd’s Rules](#key-codds-rules)

---

## Introduction

The Relational Model organizes data using tables (relations) consisting of rows and columns.

The relational model represents how data is stored and managed in Relational Databases where data is organized into tables, each known as a relation.
Each row of a table represents an entity or record and each column represents a particular attribute of that entity.
The relational model transforms conceptual designs from ER diagrams into implementable structures. These structures are used in relational database systems like Oracle SQL and MySQL.

---

## Key Terms in the Relational Model

- **Attribute**: Attributes are the properties that define an entity. For example, ROLL_NO, NAME, ADDRESS etc.
- **Relation Schema**: A relation schema defines the structure of the relation and represents the name of the relation with its attributes. For example, STUDENT (ROLL_NO, NAME, ADDRESS, PHONE and AGE) is the relation schema for STUDENT. If a schema has more than 1 relation it is called Relational Schema.
- **Tuple**: A Tuple represents a row in a relation. Each tuple contains a set of attribute values that describe a particular entity. For example, (1, RAM, DELHI, 9455123451, 18) is a tuple in the STUDENT table.
- **Relation Instance**: The set of tuples of a relation at a particular instance of time is called a relation instance. It can change whenever there is an insertion, deletion or update in the database.
- **Degree**: The number of attributes in the relation is known as the degree of the relation. For example, The STUDENT relation has a degree of 5, as it has 5 attributes.
- **Cardinality**: The number of tuples in a relation is known as cardinality. For example, The STUDENT relation defined above has cardinality 4.
- **NULL Values**: The value which is not known or unavailable is called a NULL value. It is represented by NULL. For example, PHONE of STUDENT having ROLL_NO 4 is NULL.

---

## Codd Rules in Relational Model

E.F. Codd, the creator of the relational model, proposed 12 rules (known as Codd’s 12 Rules) that define what constitutes a relational database system. These rules emphasize the importance of data independence, consistency and structure.

### Key Codd’s Rules

- **Rule 1: The information rule** : All information in a relational database is represented logically in tables (relations).
- **Rule 2: The guaranteed access rule** : Every data element is accessible by using a combination of table name, primary key and attribute name.
- **Rule 5: The powerful language rule** : A relational DBMS should have a comprehensive language capable of expressing all relational queries.
